.TH IPLOAD 8 "August 2022" "ipload 1.x" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ipload \- Load your firewall on boot
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipload
[\fB\-\-load\fR
| \fB\-\-load\-basic\fR
| \fB\-\-load-default\fR
| \fB\-\-verify\fR
| \fB\-\-flush\fR
| \fB\-\-show\fR
| \fB\-\-show\-dependencies\fR]
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBipload(8)\fR tool runs once at boot time in order to load firewall
definitions before the network is up. This part of the process is automatic
as long as the installation functions as expected. However, you still want
to make sure to turn some services ON or OFF as required by your system.
.PP
The default rules make use of several `ipset' to register lists of IP
addresses and ports. These are automatically created and filled by
\fBipload(8)\fR.

.SH BASIC USAGE
The \fBipload(8)\fR tool must be called using one command. Without
a command, the process fails. In most cases, you want to use the
\fB\-\-load\fR command to load your rules in the firewall. The other
commands are useful to debug your rules.
.PP
The commands supported by this version of \fBipload(8)\fR are:
.PP
\fB\-\-load\fR -- load the rules in \fBiptables\fR
.br
\fB\-\-load\-basic\fR -- only load the basic rules in \fBiptables\fR
.br
\fB\-\-load\-default\fR -- load the default firewall in \fBiptables\fR
.br
\fB\-\-verify\fR -- verify that the firewall can be loaded
.br
\fB\-\-flush\fR -- flush the firewall
.br
\fB\-\-show\fR -- show the ipload output, do not load it
.br
\fB\-\-show-dependencies\fR -- show a Makefile list of targets and dependencies
.PP
Additional details about these commands appear in the following sections.

.SH "BASIC & DEFAULT FIREWALLS"
The \fBbasic\fR firewall is there to make sure that the firewall blocks
everything in the event it is misconfigured (i.e. \fBipload(8)\fR fails
to compile all the configuration files). It always gets loaded when you
run \fBipload(8)\fR with the `--load' command.
.PP
The \fBdefault\fR firewall is available to you to setup a decent firewall
which blocks most everything while you work on fixing your firewall
configuration files. It is also useful on computers that do not need to
be accessed from the outside.

.SH "VERIFYING FIREWALL RULES"
The `--verify' command can be used to make sure that all the rules can be
loaded. This does not verify everything 100%, but it is very close to
(i.e. the creation of `ipset', for example, is not currently verified with
this option).
.PP
This command is most useful in a script. Say you are creating a package with
\fBipload(8)\fR rules, you can run a shell command to verify that it can
compile all the rules or fail the creating of the package altogether.

.SH "DEBUGGING RULES"
The number of rules is pretty large. To make sure that the rules are in
the correct order and include the correct parameters (i.e. correct source
or destination IP addresses), then you can use the `--show' command line
option.
.PP
The `--show' command should be used with a tool such as \fBless(1)\fR or
save the output to a file and then check the file.

    ipload --show 2>&1 | less
      -- or --
    ipload --show iptables.rules 2>&1
    vim iptables.rules
.PP
First, you may need to make sure that the files are being loaded in the
correct order. To do so, use the `--verbose' command line option. With
that option, \fBipload(8)\fR displays the list of files it loads in the
order they get loaded. By default, this means the following are searched:

    /usr/share/iplock/ipload/*/*.conf
    /usr/share/iplock/ipload/ipload.d/[0-9][0-9]-*.conf
    /usr/share/iplock/ipload/ipload.d/*/[0-9][0-9]-*.conf
    /etc/iplock/ipload/*/*.conf
    /etc/iplock/ipload/ipload.d/[0-9][0-9]-*.conf
    /etc/iplock/ipload/ipload.d/*/[0-9][0-9]-*.conf

You can change the `/usr/share/iplock/ipload' and `/etc/iplock/ipload'
directories with the `--rules' option. Each file has the ability to
override the parameters defined in a previous file (however, that fails
within a file--so you cannot define the same parameter more than once
in a file).
.PP
All the \fBipload(8)\fR configuration files support variables. These can
be debugged using the `--show-variables' option. This option works with
most of the commands, including `--load', although it is certainly most
useful when using `--show'.
.PP
While working on debugging the firewall rules, you may want to use the
`--comment' option. This asks the `ipload' tool to add useful comments to
the output. This is really helps to quickly find your chains and rules
in the resulting output.
.PP
One issue with rules is the order in which they finally appear in `iptables'.
You must make sure that the order you intended is respected. To help in that
matter, `ipload' offers two features: \fBSections\fR and \fBBefore/After\fR
parameters.
.PP
The five default ipload \fBSections\fR are already sorted: `header',
`early_content', `content', `late_content', `footer'. The sorting is made
possible using the \fBSections\fR `before' and `after' parameters--i.e. the
`early_content' is defined as being `after' the `header':

    [section::early_content]
    after = header
.PP
The rules are sorted first by assigning them to a specific section. Then
rules within a section can further be sorted using the `before' and `after'
parameters.
.PP
In most cases, you want to extend the list of opened ports to services your
server provides. This is done by adding a rule that opens a port and you
want to place that service in the `content' section of the `INPUT' chain.
Because of that, you rarely have to use the `before' and `after' parameters.
The order in which the opened ports appear in the list of services is very
rarely in need of sorting (i.e. whether HTTP appears before or after DNS
should not matter).
.PP
We have one special service: \fBSSH\fR. That one appears early because
we do not want to inadvertendly block the administrator before they have
a chance to connect and manage their server.

.SH "RESETTING IPTABLES"
The `--flush' command can be used to delete all the rules, reset the
default chain policies, delete user defined chains, and also destroy
all the `ipset'.
.PP
This is particularly useful while debugging. When I use the `--load' command
on a VirtualBox, it is not unlikely to block all my network connections
between that VirtualBox and the host/Internet. That means I can't use commands
such as `git pull' to refresh my code and try my changes. With the `--flush'
command, I can reset the firewall of that VirtualBox, update the code, and
try again.
.PP
You should never use this option on a production system. This would completely
open your firewall and that's exactly the time when hackers connect to your
unprotected services and take over your computer.

.SH "COMMAND LINE OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-\-build\-date\fR
Display the date and time when the tool was last built.

.TP
\fB\-\-command\-help\fR
List the commands understood by `ipload'.

.TP
\fB\-\-comment\fR
When showing the output with the \-\-show command, include comments.

Note that the `iptables-restore' and `ip6tables-restore' commands do not
support comments. This is only to make it easier to read the resulting
generated rules.

.TP
\fB\-\-compiler\-version\fR
Output the version information of the C++ compiler used to compile the
`advgetopt' library. In most cases, this is the same as the compiler used
to compile the `ipload' tool.

.TP
\fB\-\-configuration\-filenames\fR
List the filename of each configuration file that `ipload' reads on
startup.

.TP
\fB\-\-console\fR
Print the logs out to the console. This overrides the logger configuration
files.

.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-copyright\fR
Print out the copyright notice of the `ipload' tool.

.TP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
Change the logger severity to the `debug' level. This command line option
changes the level of all the appenders configured for `ipload'.

.TP
\fB\-\-environment\-variable\-name\fR
Print the name of the variable to the console. This variable can be used
to enter options instead of writing them on the command line or the
configuration file. Commands are not allowed in the environment variable.

.TP
\fB\-\-except\-stack\-collect\fR \fIno|yes|simple|complete\fR
Defines what exceptions are expected to collect from the stack.
Nearly all our exceptions are expected to stop a process. This command line
option gives you the ability to define how much information is to be collected
from the stack trace when that exception occurred. By default, it is set to
`yes' (which is the synomym of `simple'). With the logger, that exception
stack information can automatically be logged to your log file. Very useful
to debug issues in your software running on a remote server.

.TP
\fB-F\fR, \fB\-\-flush\fR
Flush the firewall back to its defaults.

\fBWARNING:\fR This is dangerous on a live server. It is available mainly
for administrators to have the ability to test their firewall and make sure
that it looks as expected. For that reason, when run in your console, `ipload'
first verifies that you really want to do that by asking you to enter:
"YES I AM SURE!" and hit enter. It has to be typed in uppercase without
the quotes.

The flush also resets each chain policy back to `ACCEPT' and deletes all the
user defined chains.

.TP
\fB\-\-force\-severity\fR \fIlevel\fR
Change the logger severity to this specific level. This new level is
applied to all the defined appenders. The level is changed whether it
is higher or lower than the current appender's level.

.TP
\fB\-\-has\-sanitizer\fR
Print whether this version was compiled with the C++ compiler sanitizer.

.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a brief document about the tool usage, then exit.

.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-license\fR
Print out the license of `ipload' and exit.

.TP
\fB--list-appenders\fR
List the available appenders as used by the logger.

.TP
\fB\-\-list\-severities\fR
List the available severities as used by the logger.

.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-load\fR
Load the firewall. This command can be used any number of times. It reloads
the most current files and always refreshes the firewall atomically. This
ensures that the latest is loaded. Packages that install new firewall rules
should have a trigger if they do not install them in the expected location
(i.e. under /usr/share/iplock/ipload).

.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-load\-basic\fR
Load the basic firewall only. This commands is used to forcibly loads only
the basic firewall. This blocks all incoming connections except for ports
53 (DNS), 5353 (on Ubuntu, DNS on IPv6), and 22 (SSH). It should have
sufficient open rules to let your computer work as expected. It also allows
connections to port 22 (SSH).

This basic firewall is automatically loaded when you first run the
`ipload' command. It then gets completely replaced by either the `default'
or the user defined firewall rules. This is a safety measure in case the
default or user defined firewall rules cannot be loaded properly. In this
way your server is protected until you fix your rules.

.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-load\-default\fR
This command is used to load the default firewall. When the `ipload' command
is run, it attempts to load user defined rules. If that fails, it falls back
to loading a default set of rules in your firewall.

This firewall is a little more extended than the basic firewall and includes
dynamic rules.

.TP
\fB\-\-log\-component\fR \fIname\fR...
Define one or more component name to filter the logs. Only logs with that
component are output, others are ignored. You can use the `!' (exclamation
mark) character in front of a name to exclude logs with that component.

.TP
\fB\-\-log\-config\fR \fIfilename\fR
Only load this very configuration file to setup the logger.

.TP
\fB\-\-log\-config\-path\fR \fIpath\fR
Define a path to search for log configuration files instead of using the
defaults.

.TP
\fB\-\-log\-file\fR \fIfilename\fR
Save the logs in this specific file instead of what is defined in the
configuration files.

.TP
\fB\-\-log\-severity\fR \fIlevel\fR
Change the severity to this level unless the appender already accepts logs
for a lower level. So for example, an appender setup to output logs with a
severity level of `error' or higher is affected by the `warning' level.
An appender setup to output logs with a severity level of `info' does not
changed when setting this command line option to `warning'.

.TP
\fB\-\-logger\-configuration\-filenames\fR
List the files that the logger reads to be setup. If no files are found,
then messages appear in the console by default.

.TP
\fB\-\-logger\-hide\-banner\fR
Request that the logger does not print the banner in the console. This is
particularly useful for command line tools (opposed to a service). The
`ipload' service automatically turns this option on.

.TP
\fB\-\-logger\-plugin\-paths\fR \fIpath1:path2:...\fR
This option allows you to change the path(s) to the `snaplogger' plugins. You
can enter multiple paths by separating them with a colon (:).

.TP
\fB\-\-logger\-show\-banner\fR
Request that the logger prints its banner when it starts. This is useful
if you run a tool from a service and want to make sure the administrator
knows which version of the tool is being used.

.TP
\fB\-\-logger\-version\fR
Print out the version of the Snap! Logger and exit.

.TP
\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-no\-defaults\fR
Prevent loading the default rules. If the user defined rules do not load
properly, just quit immediately.

In most cases, you want to use this option only when debugging your rules
in order to avoid getting the defaults instead of your rules installed.
When running the service on a boot, using this option would prevent any
kind of firewall from being installed if any rule is invalid and the
load fails, leaving the firewall wide open.

This option cannot be used along the \fB\-\-load\-basic\fR command.

.TP
\fB\-\-no\-log\fR
Turn off the logger so nothing gets printed out. This is somewhat similar
to a quiet or silent option that many Unix tools offer.

.TP
\fB\-\-option\-help\fR
Print the list of options supported by `ipmgr'.

.TP
\fB\-\-path\-to\-option\-definitions\fR
Option definitions can be defined in a .ini file. If it exists, this is the
path where it can be found.

.TP
\fB\-\-print\-option\fR \fIname\fR
This option is useful to debug your command line, environment variable, and
configuration files by printing the value of the named option. This tells
you what value the tool or service sees in the end.

.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Prevent the `iptables' tools from printing output message in your console.
The exit code is still used to know whether an error occurred or not.

.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-rules\fR
One or more colon separated paths to directories scanned for firewall rules.

By default, this is set to `/usr/share/iplock/ipload:/etc/iplock/ipload'.
The paths are used in order, which is important since you can override
the `enabled' parameter of a rule.

With the default, it is expected the tools install their own rules under
`/usr/share/iplock/ipload' and override (disable) rules by installing
files under `/etc/ipload/ipload/ipload.d/??-<package-name>.conf'.

.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-show\fR
Show the rules in your console (stdout). This is extremely useful as a first
step to debug your firewall before \fB\-\-load\fR-ing it.

When the \fB\-\-comment\fR option is used alongside the \fB\-\-show\fR
option, the `ipload' tool writes headers for each table and chain.

Further, the \fB\-\-verbose\fR option adds comments for each rule. Making
it even easier to find which file generated which iptables rules.

\fBWARNING:\fR To get output which is compatible with the `iptables-restore'
and `ip6tables-restore' tools, you cannot use the \fB\-\-comment\fR or
\fB\-\-verbose\fR options. Also, if `ipload' exits with a value other than 0
then the output should be considered invalid.

.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-show\-dependencies\fR
This option is used to show the dependency tree as built by the `ipload' tool
before organizing the data in the proper order. Sections and Rules can be
given `before' and `after' parameters. These defined the order in which
the Sections and Rules are to be used. This is very important since you
want to block certain things before allowing others and vice versa.

The output looks like a Makefile with the name of each rule and their
dependencies. The dependencies in this output are only `after' rules.
So for example `b: a' means that rule `b' must be added after rule `a'.
`ipload' transforms all the `before' parameters in `after' parameters.

Note that this tree is always built internally as it is required to sort
the rules properly.

.TP
\fB\-\-show\-option\-sources\fR
The `advgetopt' library has the ability to trace where each value is
read from: which file, the command line, the environment variable.
This option can be used to determine where a value is defined, which once
in a while is particularly useful.

.TP
\fB\-\-syslog\fR [\fIidentity\fR]
Send the logs to the system `syslog'. If specified, the `identity' is used
along each message.

.TP
\fB\-\-trace\fR
Change the logger severity to the TRACE level. All appenders accept all the
logs that they receive.

.TP
\fB-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Show the various steps taken by `ipload' as it runs.

.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-verify\fR
Run the `ipload' tool in \fIdry mode\fR. This function runs the tool as if
the \fB\-\-load\fR command line option was used, but without actually loading
anything in your firewall. This is useful to detect an error before running
the command for real. By default, no output is generated unless some errors
are generated.

.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print the `ipload' version number, then exit.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Alexis Wilke <alexis@m2osw.com>.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <https://github.com/m2osw/iplock/issues>.
.br
ipload home page: <https://snapwebsites.org/project/iplock>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2022 Made to Order Software Corporation
.br
License: GPLv3
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ipload (5),
.BR iplock (1),
.BR iprecent (1),
.BR ipwall (8),
.BR knock-knock (1),
.BR showfw (1)
