.TH IPRECENT 1 "August 2022" "iprecent 1.x" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
iprecent \- Manage IP addresses in xt-recent lists
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B iprecent
[\fIOPTION\fR] <command> [<lit> [<ip> ...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBiprecent(1)\fR tool is used to manage the list of xt-recent IP
addresses. This is useful if someone's allowed to access your server gets
their IP added to one of these lists.

.SH "COMMANDS"
.TP
\fBiprecent add ...\fR
The \fBiprecent(1)\fR tool can be used to add one or more IPs to the list:

    iprecent add <list> <ip1> <ip2> ... <ipN>

.TP
\fBiprecent flush ...\fR
The \fBiprecent(1)\fR tool can be used to remove all the IP addresses of a
specific list:

    iprecent flush <list>

Or from all the lists:

    iprecent flush

.TP
\fBiprecent help\fR
Print the help screen in your console.

    iprecent help

.TP
\fBiprecent list\fR
\fBiprecent(1)\fR prints the xt-recent lists to your console.

    iprecent list

.TP
\fBiprecent remove ...\fR
The \fBiprecent(1)\fR tool can be used to remove one or more IPs from a list:

    iprecent remove <list> <ip1> <ip2> ... <ipN>

.TP
\fBiprecent show ...\fR
The \fBiprecent(1)\fR tool can be used to see the content of a specific list:

    iprecent show <list>

or the content of all the lists:

    iprecent show

.SH "COMMAND LINE OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a brief document about the tool usage, then exit.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Alexis Wilke <alexis@m2osw.com>.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <https://github.com/m2osw/iplock/issues>.
.br
iplock home page: <https://snapwebsites.org/project/iplock>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2022-2025  Made to Order Software Corp.  All Rights Reserved
.br
License: GPLv3
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ipload (5),
.BR ipload (8),
.BR iplock (1),
.BR ipwall (8),
.BR knock-knock (1),
.BR showfw (1)
