.TH SHOWFW 1 "August 2022" "showfw 1.x" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
showfw \- Show the firewall without blocking it
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sudo showfw
[\fI\-\-OPTION\fR] [<chain>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBshowfw(1)\fR script is used to display the current firewall.
In most cases, complete firewalls are many pages long. This script
outputs the firewall in a file and then sends it to \fBless(1)\fR.
This way, the firewall itself doesn't remain locked and you can
take your time to look at your rules, apply fixes and then test
them.

Without options, the IPv4 filter chains are shown.

.SH "COMMAND LINE OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-4\fR
Display the IPv4 firewall. This is the default.

.TP
\fB\-6\fR
Display the IPv6 firewall.

.TP
\fB\-\-filter\fR
Display the `filter' table. This is the default.

.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a brief document about the tool usage, then exit.

.TP
\fB\-\-line-numbers\fR, \fB\-l\fR
Include the line number of each rule. This can be useful if you want to
insert a new rule and delete a specific rule.

.TP
\fB\-\-mangle\fR
Display the `mangle' table.

.TP
\fB\-\-nat\fR
Display the `nat' table.

.TP
\fB\-\-raw\fR
Display the `raw' table.

.TP
\fB\-\-security\fR
Display the `security' table.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Alexis Wilke <alexis@m2osw.com>.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <https://github.com/m2osw/iplock/issues>.
.br
iplock home page: <https://snapwebsites.org/project/iplock>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2022-2025  Made to Order Software Corp.  All Rights Reserved
.br
License: GPLv3
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ipload (5),
.BR ipload (8),
.BR iplock (1),
.BR iprecent (1),
.BR ipwall (8),
.BR knock-knock (1)
